Hi, I'm Lionel Lemarié
from the GPU software team.
In this session, we're going to use
the Metal Counter API
to get precise GPU timings at runtime.
We will cover a few topics.
We'll start with a quick intro
of the Metal Counter API.
Then we'll take a brief look at the main
features of a typical live profiling HUD.
We'll use the API step-by-step
to collect the profiling information.
And we'll conclude by looking
at how this data fits into the HUD.
So let's start
with a quick intro of the API.
The Metal Counter API is new in iOS 14.
It was available in macOS Catalina
and has been extended in macOS Big Sur.
On iOS and macOS with Apple Silicon,
it gives you access
to stage boundary timings.
That is, precise start and end times
for vertex, fragment and compute passes.
On Intel and AMD GPUs,
you can get draw boundary timings,
precise GPU timestamps
even within individual passes.
Next, let's do a quick recap of
the main features of a live profiling HUD.
You'd use a live HUD to track
your app's performance at runtime.
It can help you find problem areas
that need to be investigated off-line
in Xcode or Instruments.
You can also use them
to tune your resolution
and quality settings per device,
for instance.
As an example, a typical live HUD
may look something like this.
Frame times, as a scrolling line chart,
to help you catch frame hitches,
stats about your memory usage,
resolution and more
and the timeline of CPU events.
And today, we'll add GPU events
to the timeline.
Typically, for your CPU markers,
you would instrument
your most important functions
using mach_absolute_time
to get the start and end timestamps.
A good start with CPU markers
is to put them
around your command buffer work--
a start marker when you create it
and an end marker when you commit it.
That gives you an overview
of the CPU costs of your rendering.
Now we want to add equivalent GPU markers.
You may be familiar with the GPU events
on the Metal System Trace timeline,
as we're seeing here.
On iOS in this example,
it shows the different stages
of the tile-based deferred
rendering architecture.
Here we see the vertex
and fragment processing work.
To do this, the GPU firmware logs
the start and end of the vertex stage.
Then it logs the start
and end of the fragment stage.
And the Metal System Trace
displays the stages on the timeline.
For immediate mode GPUs,
you can log events
for groups of draw calls.
For example, you would log
the start of rendering object one
before all of its draw calls
and then log the start
of rendering object two.
And finally, the end of object two.
You then have a timeline that shows
precisely how long the GPU
spends rendering each object.
Now let's use the Metal Counter API
to achieve that.
We'll start by checking which
counter sampling modes are available.
We need to know whether the GPU
should record at the stage boundary,
for vertex, fragments or compute stages,
or if it should record
at the draw boundary, as we've just seen.
We simply use
the supportsCounterSampling API
to check if the current device supports
stage boundary, for a TBDR GPU,
or draw boundary for unlimited mode GPU.
Next we check which counter sets
are available on the device.
Counter sets include timestamps,
stage utilization and pipeline statistics.
For our GPU markers, we need
the counter set that collects timestamps.
So we enumerate all available counter sets
on the device
and choose the one for timestamps.
Once you have the right counter set,
inspect it to ensure
that it does have timestamps,
as some devices may not support them.
We're done with the initial setup.
Now let's see what's needed
at runtime during each frame.
There are just four easy steps.
First we'll create a sample buffer
with a size, storage mode
and the counter set we just looked up.
Then we'll add the sample buffer
to the pass descriptor.
Note that it means that you need
at least one buffer per pass.
Next, if we're using sampling
at draw boundary,
we'll add sampling commands
at important points.
Finally, in the completion handler,
we'll resolve the counters.
And we'll talk about aligning CPU
and GPU timestamps if needed.
Let's check out each step in detail.
First, we create a sample buffer
using a descriptor.
We specify the maximum number
of samples it can hold,
so it has the right size.
We'll use six samples here,
but you'll typically use more than that.
Then we set the storage mode.
Shared mode is great here.
It's not a lot of data, and it makes
accessing the counters extra easy.
We specify the counter set to use,
the one for timestamps.
Finally, we create the sample buffer.
So far, so good.
Now we have a buffer for six samples.
As an example,
let's use it in a render encoder.
You would do it the same for compute
and blit encoders.
For this,
you use the sample buffer attachment
from the render pass descriptor.
If we are using stage boundary,
this is where we set it up.
We specify the start and end
of the vertex stage.
We're putting them at index zero
and one in the sample buffer.
That's how the GPU knows
where to write each sample
and how you know
where to retrieve them from.
Same for the start and end
of the fragment stage.
Finally, we pointed to the sample buffer
that we just created
to store those samples.
To sample a draw boundary,
you add sample commands
at key points of your command stream.
The first obvious placement for these
is before and after all draw calls.
So after you've created a new encoder,
you immediately add a sample command.
We'll put it at index four, since we've
already reserved the first four slots
for stage boundary samples.
After all your draw calls,
right before ending your encoders,
you add a sample command at index five.
So the GPU will record a timestamp
before and after all the work
for that encoder.
You can add more sample commands
between groups of draw calls
to mark important milestones.
Just make sure your sample buffer
is allocated with enough space in advance.
Speaking of which,
we've allocated a buffer big enough
for both stage boundary
and draw boundary sampling.
You can easily optimize it
by allocating just enough
for stage or draw boundary sampling
in isolation,
since they are mutually exclusive.
Right. The GPU has been instructed
to sample timestamp counters
at stage or draw boundary.
Next, we wait
for the rendering to complete,
and in the handler, we collect the data.
Remember that
we created a sample buffer per encoder.
So in the common buffer
completion handler,
we may need to parse
multiple sample buffers.
For each one, we resolve the counters.
That translates different specific data
into the unified Metal struct
that's super easy to parse.
Simply point to it
and use the CounterResult struct.
As we specified that vertexStart
should be at index zero,
we read it directly from there.
Then we'll do the same
for all other samples.
Note that some error checking
is needed here.
It's possible that the GPU failed to fill
the sample buffer
so you need to check that the result step
collected the expected number of samples
and that each sample is valid.
The GPU will use a predefined error value
if it can't get a specific timestamp.
On iOS and Apple Silicon devices,
the GPU timestamps are aligned
to mach_absolute_time
so you can directly compare them
to CPU timestamps.
On Intel and AMD GPUs,
an extra step is needed.
They need to be translated
from a vendor specific time domain.
This is because
depending on how busy the GPU is,
how much power it consumes
and how hot it's running,
its clock frequency
is constantly adjusted over time,
which affects the timestamps.
To address this on immediate mode GPUs,
you use the sample timestamp's API
to query matching CPU
and GPU timestamps at a given time.
You do it at regular intervals
to avoid drifting
and keep precise correlation over time.
Then you do a simple linear interpolation
of the samples collected.
As an example,
you may call sample timestamps
inside the common buffer
completion handler
so you get one correlation per frame.
Let's say you query
CPU and GPU timestamps at t0.
And then at the next frame,
you query them at t1.
All GPU counters from the sample buffers
can now be scaled
and offset back into CPU domain.
And that's all we need. So let's look
at how it could all be displayed together.
We're seeing the CPU markers.
We captured them with mach_absolute_time.
We're seeing vertex, fragment
and compute stages
all overlapping
and aligned with CPU activity.
You can even collect
the mach_absolute_time
inside the presented handler
to align all the markers
to actual glass-to-glass frames
and precisely display all the events
within each frame.
Using this HUD, you get a great view
of whether you're CPU or GPU bound,
your dependencies and sync points,
the breakdown of vertex, fragment
and compute work
and how they affect each other.
All of that, live,
right there inside your app.
There are a few things
you can watch out for.
Don't update the HUD too often.
Just like an FPS counter,
live data can be hard to read
if it's constantly changing.
You can collect the timestamps every frame
but only update the markers on-screen
once per second, for example.
It makes it
significantly easier to follow.
Secondly, GPU activity
depends on its clock rate.
Seeing a high GPU occupancy
does not necessarily mean it is maxed out.
As the system only uses
as much power as needed,
it will balance power and performance.
As a consequence, you might see the GPU
being 80% busy in the HUD.
But if it is running
at half the max clock rate,
then it would actually be running
at 40% of the peak performance
and have plenty of headroom.
And as always, you should handle errors,
but you should also watch out
for inconsistencies.
For example, counters can overflow,
which would cause a new value
to be smaller than the previous one
and may trigger a negative duration.
Or putting your device to sleep
or hibernate while sampling counters
may also cause large outliers.
Those are rare events,
and you should skip them gracefully
to avoid glitches in your display or logs.
And so to recap,
we've just gone through the steps
to use the Metal Counter API
to collect GPU timestamps.
To do that, we used
the device supportsCounterSampling method
to find out which sampling modes
are supported.
We enumerated the counter sets
to find the set with the GPU timestamps.
We created a new sample buffer
using its descriptor
and used it in the render command encoder.
You will want to do the same
with a blit and compute encoder too.
We added specific sample commands
before and after all the draws.
You can add them between draws,
dispatches and blits too
to get sub past timings.
We resolved the counters into CPU memory.
And finally, we realigned them if needed.
And with that,
you have all the data needed
for a powerful, live GPU profiling HUD
to display on top of your app.
And this API gives you access to more
than just the GPU timestamps.
You can get summarized
per stage information,
which is easier to process if you are not
drawing the events on the timeline.
And importantly, you can get
some in-depth statistics,
such as the number of invocations
for vertex and fragment shaders
and compute kernels and much more.
There's enough to explore
in the Metal Counter API,
and it gives you access
to a lot of information
to profile your GPU performance
at runtime.
That's it for this session.
Thanks for watching.